# The Art of Peer-Evaluation

42 is a community. You’re part of a whole. In this context, just like any other student, you are legit to fully act as intended during your curriculum and contribute to everyone's progress. This definitely includes the evaluation of your peers.

By talking all the time to a lot of people, sharing ideas or explaining your code, you always have regular feedback from this community on what your work really worths. You’re aware of what works and what does not, if you’re going to have rather a good grade or rather a bad one. Long story short, no unexpected things will happen during the defense. Grades exists mainly for yourself and for the staff to monitor individual progression, and also to help students face the real status about their work.

If you pay enough attention to the appropriate pages of this FAQ, you should be familiar with the classical peer-learning approach: with reading/debates of the subject, then on leads to follow, tests, debates again, and so on until success. However, this process includes a final step, a step back of understanding, of balance, of feedback on your work once it’s done, its difficulties, the strategies you chose, what worked out, and what failed. Once the work is done, one could rush towards the next project. This final and most important step is sometime botched, sometime even ignored by the less involved students. That's a pitty for sure. This final step is extremely important, even vital to your schooling, WHATEVER the quality of your work ! At 42, the only time suitable for such final step is the defense. You should always get the appropriate amount of time for the evaluations, and get better opportunities to increase your knowledge and your skills.

Engaging multiple defenses in a row for a given project is important, for both the statistical aspect of it (by removing side effects) and the psychological aspect, in order to not regress back to the teacher’s "one and only truth" era. One should engage as much defenses as possible for a given project, in order meet a great amount of interlocutors, both as defender and defendee. Never trust someone who tells you defenses are a waste of time. This kind of speech is the symptom of someone who don’t understand yet the school’s philosophy and goals (...may be more likely about to drop at some point).

This is our view of what a defense should be:
- Meeting someone (new?). Exchanging names, smiles and good mood. But most of all, meeting someone in the flesh. No mails, phone calls or whatever except for defense arrangement! Never accept a defense if the other student is not physically present next to you. Please read that sentence again. Then, and only then, the evaluating peer can git clone (or ask git clone) the repository of the evaluated peer.
- Take your time. The time to stop, to sit, to talk and to discover each other. Each peer will be different, each defense is unique. Whatever the work done (or not done), a defense must last the required time (indicated on the intranet).
- If a Norm applies to the project, it must be checked first, before anything else, by using the official “norminette”. This step is not random. The Norm is not aimed to make you a foolproof develloper, its goal is to help you growing your capacity to use elements of verification, and monitoring of your work. If the Norm is not respected, the defense stops. And yes,that means the grade is 0. There is no such thing as a “tiny-not-important-at-all Norm error”. Either the Norm is respected in the whole code, or it is not.
- Notice, together, what works, and what does not. Everybody should agree on the results of the tests, as well as the respect of the scale and the grade. If not, debate until you do. The grading step is more a functionnal step, like your future client who checks if all the specifications are fulfilled, without wondering if a hashtable or a linked list have been used. Don’t grade how the code has been written. Grade if the code works or not.
- An exchange. Of ideas, of hypothesis, of solutions. Of the relevance and the quality of the product, its factors of success or failure. Think about it like a conversation between you and a coworker. If how the code has been written can't be graded, it can definitely be discussed. Do not hesitate to exchange on the various successful paths available.
- Constructive. Everybody should leave a defense with the feeling of learned something new, either on the technical, relational or organisational side.

We could add lots of mandatory rules and lots of interdictions, but I’d rather like that each and everyone to appropriate this state of mind, because this state of mind is meaningful. Feedbacks are also important, use them to witness the quality of a defense.

Some of you will undoubtly fail to understand the philosophy of the school and see in this text the gibberish of a hippy know-it-all. It’s not. But to help you understand, let’s sum things up a bit:
- Every defenses must happen with every students involved physically present
- The amount of grades received must reach a required threshold, otherwise you won’t receive experience points in case of success.
- This same amount of required grades also applies to given grades, and must be reached too, otherwise, you will loose you “evaluation points” and you won’t be allowed to have your work evaluated anymore until you earn some evaluation points by evaluating other. Think of the evaluation points as a currency.
- It’s absolutely forbidden to refuse an already planned defense for whatever reason.
- Feedback is mandatory and must be done right after the defense. As long as all your feedback are not done, you won’t receive experience points.

These elements are essential to the efficiency of peer-evaluation, and are parts of the deal between the school and you. Non compliance with these rules will lead to sanctions.
These sanctions can span from the deletion of a grade to a definitive exclusion.
One more time, these elements must be considered as a natural behavior in your schooling and toward 42’s community. If you feel like these rules are a constraint for you, then your working ethics and involvement toward you schooling must mature.
